Add semantic conventions for errors (#427)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/data-error-semantic-conventions.md

# Semantic conventions for errors

> This document defines semantic conventions for recording errors.

Reviewer: Reading the semantic conventions here (especially `error.type`) it seems that these conventions are specifically geared towards recording thrown exceptions rather than any kind of error (cf. #306 which, despite the title, contains quite some interesting discussion about the issue).

## Recording an Error

An error SHOULD be recorded as an `Event` on the span during which it occurred.

> The name of the event MUST be `"error"`.

Reviewer 2: The implication of having a name like "error" is that there is exactly one error that can be logged per span. What is the recommendation to track errors where a single request forks out into multiple requests (scatter-gather pattern) and there are multiple failures?

Reviewer: I think the proper way would be creating a span for each sub-request.

Reviewer 3: in golang, we are creating a separate spanevent for each error message.

Reviewer 4: @mwear A reminder about what we discussed in the last WG meeting: possibly introduce SeverityNumber instead of "error" event name as the indication of an erroneous event. This will align the Span Event better with Log data model: https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/blob/master/text/logs/0097-log-data-model.md#error-semantics
I think there is value in aligning embedded Span Events and standalone Log Records as much as possible.

## Attributes

The table below indicates which attributes should be added to the `Event` and
their types.

| Attribute name | Type       | Notes and examples                                           | Required? |

> | :------------- | :--------- | :----------------------------------------------------------- | :-------- |

Reviewer 5: @mwear thanks for tagging this PR @ https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/86. Proposed fields are already part of opentracing specification. Please refer https://github.com/opentracing/specification/blob/master/semantic_conventions.md#log-fields-table

We should add below tag https://github.com/opentracing/specification/blob/master/semantic_conventions.md#span-tags-table
> error | bool | true if and only if the application considers the operation represented by the Span to have failed| -- | --

Reviewer 6: If this was added, I'd rather call it `fatal_error`, `unrecoverable` or similar. It would still be an error that has occurred even after being able to recover from it by retrying or using another fallback.

Reviewer 7: @tigrannajaryan suggested that we use `log.severity` to indicate how severe the exception is. I would prefer `log.severity` in this case.

Reviewer 4: Thanks @jmacd. Small correction: log data model uses [SeverityNumber](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/blob/master/text/logs/0097-log-data-model.md#field-severitynumber). Would be useful to keep the name consistent here too (and I am not sure what casing we want to use here - log data model does not mandate a particular casing).

> | error.type     | String     | The type of the error. E.g. "Exception", "OSError"           | Yes       |

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
| error.type     | String     | The type of the error (its fully-qualified class name, if applicable). E.g. "java.net.ConnectException", "OSError"           | Yes       |
```

| error.message  | String     | The error message. E.g. `"Division by zero"`, `"Can't convert 'int' object to str implicitly"` | Yes       |

> | error.stack    | Array\<String\> | A stack trace formatted as an array of strings. The stackframe at which the exeception occurred should be the first entry. E.g. `["Exception in thread \"main\" java.lang.RuntimeException: Test exception", "  at com.example.GenerateTrace.methodB(GenerateTrace.java:13)", "  at com.example.GenerateTrace.methodA(GenerateTrace.java:9)", "  at com.example.GenerateTrace.main(GenerateTrace.java:5)" ]` | No        |

Reviewer 8: I like how simple this is, but it does not expose information about file:line etc in a structured format for backends which may use it for grouping and/or filtering. And given the fact that most languages (at least Java, Go, Python, Ruby & PHP) provide access to stack info in a structured/already parsed way we will end up with
- Languages/runtimes providing stack info in a structured way like `{file: string, line: number, func: string}`
- OpenTelemetry requiring encoding that stack info as array of strings in language native human-readable format
- Backends having to parse those strings to extract information they need

That is unneeded extra work both in OpenTelemetry and backends. So my 2 cents are that `error.stack` should have some internal structure like in [this proposal](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/69/files#diff-ebaed56277523332596039b116951f2bR104-R118). Perhaps by default it should be array of JSON-encoded strings like this:

```js
[
  "{file: \"GenerateTrace.java\", line: 13, func: \"com.example.GenerateTrace.methodB\"}",
  "{file: \"GenerateTrace.java\", line: 13, func: \com.example.GenerateTrace.methodA\"}",
]
```

And if a string can't be JSON-parsed - it is a string in human-readable format you proposed.

Author: Defining an internal structure makes sense if languages have a mechanism (other than string parsing) to access the data. If folks can chime in with what fields are readily available for stackframes perhaps we can come up with a set of required and optional attributes to collect.

For Ruby we have [Thead::Backtrace::Location](https://ruby-doc.org/core-2.2.0/Thread/Backtrace/Location.html). The `line` and `file` are readily available, but `func` is not.

Reviewer 9: There are existing systems that solved this problem long time ago. We don't need to reinvent the wheel.

Eg https://docs.sentry.io/development/sdk-dev/event-payloads/stacktrace/

Author: I suppose that I have some reservations about the cost and complexity of collecting data at such a granular level. Most (if not all) of the relevant information is available in a stack trace formatted as an array of strings (or a newline delimited one). If we added the language as an attribute backends would have the information they need to parse the relevant data, and spare OpenTelemetry users from having to gather it. While this does increase the complexity of for the backend, the trade off is simplicity and improved performance for OpenTelemetry users. 

If we do go the route of more granular data, I think we should have actual structures for collecting it, and possibly separate APIs. That might make [OTEP-69](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/69) a better fit.

Reviewer 8: @mwear It would be helpful if you describe the complexity (ideally write some code) even for one language of your choice like Ruby. I insist that practically for most languages there is no significant difference between generating `  at com.example.GenerateTrace.methodA(GenerateTrace.java:9)` and `{file: "com.example.GenerateTrace.methodA(GenerateTrace.java", line: 9}`. Or the difference will be the same as between `sprintf` and `json_encode`. And it is not that hard to use `sprintf` to generate JSON if you worried about micro-optimizations. Overall the requirement to use JSON is imposed by OpenTelemetry spec - it is not specific to this use case. IMHO OpenTelemetry could be more flexible and let exporters decide what to do in this case instead of fitting data structures for protobuf usage.

@yurishkuro in fact all those error reporting services reinvent their own wheels to solve exactly the same task. And Sentry is not a particularly good example - it is a very old wheel with some legacy.

I would start with something very simple like:
- file - required
- line - required
- func - required
- column - optional for JS

It is self-documented and covers 99% use cases. I intentionally omit
- language specific things like module, class, namespace etc - they can be stored in func attribute and are not that interesting to complicate things
- frame vars aka context-locals - AFAIK only supported by Python & Ruby and double/triple stack size
- IOS and symbolication - too complex and too specific
- in_app, abs_path, raw_function - specific to Sentry
- source_version - it is not clear why every frame needs this information and how to obtain it

Reviewer 9: > in fact all those error reporting services reinvent their own wheels to solve exactly the same task.

I don't have any insight into how those services came up with their data models. What I do know is they are very established and wildly used, so rather than taking a position "let's design everything from scratch", I prefer to look at prior art, build a comparison matrix of the data elements captured by those existing data models, and then deciding which of those data elements we want to support or drop. OpenTelemetry does not have a goal of building a new exception handling backend, but to collect telemetry that is generally compatible with the existing backends. I am sure those existing systems had reasons for adding various elements that you may not consider useful. For example, I know from first hand experience how immensely useful frame vars in Python were, they made debugging so much easier.

I don't have objections to starting small with just a core set of data elements, as the schema can evolve later to cover more scenarios. But the core elements still need to be (somewhat) compatible with the existing systems.

Reviewer 10: @vmihailenco - I think that stack frame addressing may be a bit more varied than that. In Java you need both a class and a function to fully qualify a function unit and you won't have a column. In some cases a frame will not have a file or number- I believe that an exception thrown by a system framework in .Net would be an example of the latter.

Reviewer 8: In Java I see `StackTraceElement` that has
- getMethodName
- getClassName that can be used together with ClassUtil.getFilepath to obtain filepath
- getLineNumber

That information can be nicely stored in `{func, file, line}` structure I suggested.

>In some cases a frame will not have a file or number

Ack, but that is not very popular and *useful* case - debugging becomes very complicated without such basic info. But we could omit missing fields and use only `{func}` when file:line is not available.

Reviewer 10: That was actually just the first case I thought of, and that case is indeed useful- you may not go to the source to view the location, but a system framework frame is as useful to troubleshooting as an application source location. I believe a C/C++ stack trace won't have line numbers when debugging symbols have been stripped, either. I think that to @yurishkuro's point, having a "simple" tuple is liable to back us into a corner, and there is some prior work that could inform a more extensible approach.

Reviewer 8: Well, the idea that there is some prior work with good ideas was repeated several times already - what are those ideas and how they solve C++ without debugging symbols use case?

Reviewer: AFAIK, in C++ you often have at least unwind information for exception, so you can get the stack in form of a list of return addresses (e.g using libunwind). With that you record the base address of the module in which that adress points with it, so you get something like `0xfff12345 (libfoobar.so+0xabc12)`. At the backend, you may have (detached) debugging symbols for libfoobar.so available, so you can now combine that information and symbolize the module+offset pair to get something like `0xfff12345 (libfoobar.so!MyClass::myFunction(int,long)+0xa1, MyClass.cpp:356)`.

> | error.stack    | Array\<String\> | A stack trace formatted as an array of strings. The stackframe at which the exeception occurred should be the first entry. E.g. `["Exception in thread \"main\" java.lang.RuntimeException: Test exception", "  at com.example.GenerateTrace.methodB(GenerateTrace.java:13)", "  at com.example.GenerateTrace.methodA(GenerateTrace.java:9)", "  at com.example.GenerateTrace.main(GenerateTrace.java:5)" ]` | No        |

Reviewer: You say you needed arrays for these conventions, but I can't see any advantages of the array over a newline-separated string.

Author: I was (incorrectly) under the assumption that there were length limits for attribute values and that a collection would be treated differently, in that the length limits would apply to each entry rather than the value as a whole. 

While it's true that OpenTelemetry doesn't specify length limits, backends and alternate SDK implementations might choose to do so. Having a stack trace stored as an array might make it easier to avoid truncation in this situation, so I still think the idea has some merit. Aside from that, I think a newline delimited string and an array of strings are roughly equivalent, and transforming between the two representations is fairly trivial.

Reviewer 11: A couple of attributes that will be important which are covered in https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/69 are a unique hash for the particular exception and another unique hash for the exception type and line it was thrown in the code. This is important for deduplication and aggregation.

Also I still think it is important to support more kinds of errors besides application exceptions. For example, core dumps from IoT devices which would get sent after the device reboots.

Reviewer 11: There also needs to be an attribute which contains specific input parameter values. This is supported by several backend systems. It helps in debugging exceptions caused by unexpected data inputs.

Reviewer 9: @kbrockhoff could you explain why the hashes can't be computed in the backend?

Reviewer 11: In some cases, the only way to effectively calculate the identity of an exception object is the address in memory. The only alternative I can think of that would work on the backend would be if the file and line number of entire nested exception chain plus a full list of local variable values from the stack is recorded.

Reviewer 9: Address of what in memory? That sounds deployment-dependent. At Uber we have an internal system that performs deduping of exceptions, all in the backend, by hashing the stacktrace.

Reviewer 11: Hashing of the stacktrace working fine for identifying multiple triggers of the same exception/event but does not help in identifying multiple reports of the same invocation or event. For example if auto-instrumentation of a method call records the exception which is then also recorded by tracing instrumentation higher up in the call stack.

Reviewer 10: Hashing of the stacktrace could be important when information is dropped- for example a Java stacktrace with nested causes can run into the hundreds of lines, so it's not uncommon to limit the data to the nearest so many frames and drop the rest, retaining a hash of the full exception would allow determination whether two now-identical stack traces started out that way.

On the other hand, creating a hash of the exception is going to require serializing the whole exception in order to hash it which might not be needed if you are only going to send a few frames.

Reviewer 10: A string representation, whether it's an array of strings or newline-separated, does encode data in a way that can be troublesome to parse later on. In most languages I'm familiar with, the language offers access to the stack at the time of exception handling- it would seem that putting the stack frames into a normalized form would make sense at that point, rather than requiring a language dependent parse stage on the backend.

| :------------- | :--------- | :----------------------------------------------------------- | :-------- |
| error.type     | String     | The type of the error (its fully-qualified class name, if applicable). E.g. "java.net.ConnectException", "OSError"           | Yes       |
| error.message  | String     | The error message. E.g. `"Division by zero"`, `"Can't convert 'int' object to str implicitly"` | Yes       |

> | error.language | String     | The language from which the error was generated. E.g. "Java", "Python", "Ruby". | Yes       |

Reviewer: We already have recommendations for how to spell language names in the confusingly named resource semantic conventions for the telemetry library: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/3bbed37ba65df027721a6a3ab62f62dfc7fcf467/specification/data-resource-semantic-conventions.md#library

Reviewer 9: Language should be captured at the SDK level. Do we need it repeated on errors?

Reviewer 12: This is all SDK. Do you mean resource level?

Reviewer 9: Yes, I mean resource that identifies the SDK.

Author: Good point @yurishkuro. I think we can assume that the backend can get this information from the resource identifying the application. We shouldn't have to repeat it on every error. I removed `error.language` for now. If it turns out that we need it, I can add it back in later.

Reviewer: There are cases like Jython, or C# calling into native code...

Reviewer: In fact, Visual Studio shows the language for each frame in a Stack trace, so you can get as complicated as you want here.
